# spatial
Transcriptome-scale spatial expression analysis codes.



This respository contains the R codes used for analysis of trascriptome data of DLPFC from the spatialLIBD package. 
Data are about 12 samples belonging to three independet subjects. For each subject two pairs of replicates at a distance of 300 um have been taken. Intrapair replicates are at a distance of 10 um. 10x Genomics Visium technology is used to produce spiatially characterized trascriptome data.   

expr_no_layer.R script is aimed to access the ‘spe’ object retrieving samples’ coordinates and gene expression for the gene of interest. The code is used to compute the mean expression of the gene of interest in each pair of position replicates. Gene expression in terms of counts and logcounts is accessed by means of the assays(spe) spatialLIBD’s function. Two plots per patient are produced in which the gene expression is displayed as circles the diameter of which is proportional to the logcounts of the gene in the given position. If the mean expression is equal or lower than 0 the circle is colored red, otherwise blue. To compute the mean, spots are paired based on their univocal code, that represents single entries of rownames(colData(spe)). The coordinates of the first replicate for each sample are used to plot the results. Coordinates, that are expressed as pixel coordinates in the full resolution Visium image,  are accessed by means of the spatialCoords(spe) spatialLIBD’s function. No layer information is used or shown. 
The computations are performed by the gene_expr() function. To plot data the R function symbols() is used inside the aforementioned function.

spot_based_means.R script is aimed to access the ‘spe’ object to retrieve sample’s coordinates and gene expression for the gene of interest. The code is used to compute the mean expression at spot level considering different levels of data stratification. Gene expressions in terms of counts and logcounts are accessed by means of the assays(spe) spatialLIBD’s function. Mean is computed over all 12 samples, per subject (3 means from 4 replicates each) and per position (6 means from 2 replicates each. 2 positions per subject). The mean computation is performed accessing spots by their univocal code, that represents single entries of rownames(colData(spe)) . Only those spots that are present in all the current replicates are used for mean computation (e.g. the mean over all replicates is done considering the spots that are present in each of the 12 samples). The coordinates of the first sample are arbitrary chosen to plot the results. Coordinates, expressed as pixel coordinates in the full resolution Visium image, are accessed by means of the spatialCoords(spe) spatialLIBD’s function. The spots are shown as circles whose diameter is proportional to the logcounts’ mean and the color is coherent with the layer of belonging. The layer of belonging of each spot is accessed by colData(spe)$layer_guess_reordered_short function. The value returned is a factor variable with L1, L2, L3, L4, L5, L6, WM and NA as possible values. The same spot might have not been mapped to the same layer so the most voted layer for the same spot in different samples has been returned as the layer of belonging. For equally voted layers the first returned is taken. For NA mapped spots, NA is returned. 
Gene expression access and mean computation are performed by the compute_expression() function. Layer of belonging access and retrieval are performed by the layer_guess() function. Coordinates access and retrieval are performed by the coords() function. 
To plot data the R function symbols() is used inside the plot_it() function. 

plot_statistics.R script is used to access the ‘spe’ object to retrieve spot’s information as the layer of belonging (colData(spe)$layer_guess_reordered_short), the position in the subject (0 or 300. colData(spe)$position), the subject (colData(spe)$subject), the number of cells (colData(spe)$cell_count) and the ID key (univocal code for the sample that contains that spot. colData(spe)$key). The spot-level counts for the gene of interest’s expression are fetched, accessing the assays(spe) spatialLIBD’s function. All data are stored in a dataframe object. The code has a function to create a filtered version of the aforementioned dataframe in which all spots whose gene expression is equal to zero are removed. This computation has been done to account for the great sparsity of data. These dataframes are used to compute different plots to analyze the relation between gene expression or cell counts and different combinations of sample, position, layer and cell counts. Parameters. In particular the code has the following plot computation and display functions: 
- the get_number() function that allows to print tables (R table() function) of gene expression with respect to the layer, the subject, the position and the combinations of these.
- the plot_box() function that allows to plot some box plots (R boxplot()) to describe gene expression given the subject, the layer, the position, the cell counts, the position and layer, the position and layer and subject. 
- the plot_hist() function that allows to plot some histograms (R hist() function) of gene expression and cell counts.
- the plot_interaction() function that allows to show some interaction plots (R interaction.plot() function). These functions are used to describe the behavior of a function of the response variable given certain explanatory variable’s values. The function is exploited to show the interaction of the mean of the expression given the layer and the subject, given the layer and the subject, given the cell counts and the layer both in all samples and in each single subject and finally the standard deviation given the layer and the subject.
- the plot_int_zoom() function that allows to show some plots (R plot() function )describing the mean expression given the layer in each patient separately and the mean expression given the layer and the position in each patient separately.
- the plot_cc() function that allows to show some interaction plots (R interaction.plot() ) describing the relation between the mean cell counts given the layer and the position both in all samples and given the subject.
The gene expression’s values are accessed by the get_expression() function. 

column_cluster.R script is aimed to access the ‘spe’ object to retrieve spots’ information as the layer of belonging (spe$layer_guess_reordered_short), the position (0 or 300. spe$position), the subject (spe$subject), the cell counts (spe$cell_count), the ID key (univocal code for the sample that contains that spot. spe$key), the x-coordinate (spatialCoords(spe)[, 1]) and the y-coordinate (spatialCoords(spe)[,2]). Coordinates are expressed as pixel coordinates in the full resolution Visium image. Gene of interest’s expression in terms of gene counts is accessed by means of the assays(spe) spatialLIBD’s function and it is then associated to each spot. All data are stored in a dataframe object. This is accessed to divide the spots into ‘rows’ of belonging: distances between spots’ ‘y’ coordinate are computed and spots below a certain distance threshold are considered part of the same row-class. The threshold is set by manual inspection of spots’ ‘y’ distances. 12 thresholds  have been identified and used. The ‘y’ coordinate has been chosen by visual inspection that revealed spots’ limpid row organization. Spots are clustered to then compute and display the interaction between the mean expression given the layer and spots’ row-class for each sample. The interaction is computed and displayed using the R function interaction.plot(). This computation is performed to assess the change of mean gene expression going through each samples. These computations are performed by the apply_class() and creat_columns() functions.  The gene expression is accessed by the gene_expression() function. 
The script has a second chapter that is aimed to compute the K-means clustering. R kmeans() function is exploited for this task. The computations are performed for each subject and then for each positions inside the same subject. The starting number of random assignments is set to 250.

Geom_spat_.Rmd}} script is aimed to exploit the results of the column_cluster.R script to compute H-scatter plots and Semivariograms of mean gene expression and of spot-level gene expression. Both computations are performed at sample and at layer level. The script is aimed to access the biological variability of data thoughout single samples.  
H-scatter plots are computed by means of the R hscat() function while semivariograms are computed by meas of the R variogram() function, the parameters of which are set according to the semivariogram, directional semivariogram or anisogram computation. Aforementioned functions are provided by the ‘gstat’ R package. H-scattergrams are computed by means of four functions: 
- h_scat_mean_no_Y() that computes the h-scattergram for the mean gene expression for each row-class’ spots. All spots are used. The coordinates of the the first spot for each column are taken as representative of the entire row. 
- h_scat_mean_layer() that computes the h-scattergram for the mean expression only of the spots in a given layer. The mean expression is computed at row level considering spots belonging to the same row-class. The coordinates of the first spot are taken as representative of the entire row.
- h_scat_all() computes the h-scattergram for gene expression considering all spots. Spots’ row-class of belonging is not taken into account.
- h_scat_layer() computes the h-scattergram of gene expression considering only the spots in a given layer. Spots’ row-class of belonging is not taken into account.
All h-scattergram computing functions assume a constant trend for the variable of interest, ie gene expression or its mean (hscat(expression ~ 1, )), that equals the absence of regressors due to the exploratory nature of the analysis.
A part for h_scat_all() function, all the h-scattergram computing functions assess the correlation of gene expression between points at distances proportional to the range of possible sample’s distances. In h_scat_all() the ‘break’ parameter is set to fixed parameters as follows, ‘break = c(137, 138, 200, 300, 600, 1000, 1500) )’. The other parameters are set to default values.
Variograms are computed by means of twelve functions: 
- var_mean() and var_mean_layer() that compute the semivariograms for the mean gene expression of points belonging to the same row-class. For var_mean_layer() only the points of the layer of interest are taken into account. The coordinates of the first point of each row are taken as representative ofthe entire row.
- var() and var_layer() that compute the semivariograms for gene expression of all points. For var_layer() only the spots of the layer of interest are retained.
- dir_var_means() and dir_var_mean_layer() that compute the directional semivariograms for the mean gene expression of points belonging to the same row-class. For dir_mean_layer() only the points of the layer of interest are taken into account. The coordinates of the first point of each row are taken as representative of the entire row.
- dvar() and dvar_layer() that compute the directional semivariograms for gene expression of all points. For dvar_layer() only the spots of the layer of interest are retained.
- asi_var() and asi_var_layer() that computes the anisograms for the mean gene expression of points belonging to the same row-class. For asi_var_layer() only the points of the layer of interest are taken into account. The coordinates of the first point of each row are taken as representative of the entire row. The angles considered and analyzed are 0,45,90,135. 
- asi_var() and asi_var_layer() that compute the directional asinograms for gene expression of all points. For asi\_var\_layer() only the spots of the layer of interest are retained.
The variogram computing functions assume a constant trend for the variable of interest, ie gene expression or its mean (variogram(expression ~ 1, )), that equals the absence of regressors due to the exploratory nature of the analysis. The functions also have default values for ‘cutoff’ and ‘width’ parameters: in particular ‘cutoff = 4500’ and ‘width = 300’. These parameters can be changed while calling the main function.  The other parameters are set to default values. 
For all the aforementioned functions the dataframe of origin have been converted into a SpatialPointsDataFrame object, provided by the sp library. This procedure allowed for  the creation of spatial data objects needed for the gstat functions computation. 
